[WIND RUSTLING]
>> I was lucky to live in a
house when I was growing up
as a child that was located
in quite a silent location.
There was also a good view
out my bedroom window.
And I guess, as a young
child, I fell in love with it.
But I didn't know what
that meant at all.
I didn't even know what
it was, to be honest.
So how do you talk
coherently about silence?
We could talk about
silence, does it
exist in a decibel sense?
A noise sense or a
lack of noise sense?
And the literature's
clear that silence
doesn't exist in that sense.
>> The etymological roots of the
word for silence are somewhat
contested.
There are two words,
in particular,
that people go back to.
There's a Gothic term,
anasidan and then desinary.
One of them has to do
with the wind dying down
and the other has to do with
a kind of stopping of motion.
They're both to do
with an interruption,
not just of sound, but
the roots of sounds
are also due to do with the
interruption of the imposition
of our own egos on the world.
>> Almost all of the early
theologians talk about,
the ultimate wish of God is
silence and that God dwells
in the silence of eternity.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The history of monastic life
is as old as the history
of the human race.
I think, the whole
history of shamans
is a history of a kind
of proto-monasticism,
where someone in the tribe
has clearly evidently,
a facility with
silence and a facility
with understanding the unspoken
processes of the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Retreating from the cacophony
of the world is stepping
towards everything
that's essential.
It's about stepping towards
the world and really,
about learning how to
love the world, again.
>> Historically, solitude has
always had an exalted place
in our culture and it's really,
only recently that it has
fallen grace and now needs to be
restored to its rightful place.
You look at all the
religious traditions--
Buddha, Jesus, and
Mohammad, and Moses-- these
were all seekers who would
go off into the woods,
think their thoughts, have their
revelations, and then come back
and share those revelations
with the wider world.
We lose a lot when we
don't allow people--
and not just allow,
but encourage people
to go off by themselves.
Whether literally into the
woods or metaphorically,
to just go and chart your own
journey and do it by yourself.
And there are certain
paths in this life
that you've got to
walk alone and that's
the only way to do them.
[GONGS]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[BELLS RINGING]
[CHANTING IN NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Will you tell
our panel, please,
what your name is and
where you're from.
>> My name is John Cage.
I'm from Stony Point, New York.
>> He is probably, the
most controversial figure
in the musical world today and
when you hear his performance--
if you will forgive me--
you will understand why.
The instruments that he will
use include a water pitcher,
an iron pipe, a goose call, a
bathtub, five radios all hooked
up, and a grand piano.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Between 1950 and 1952, when
Cage created his most important
piece of music, Cage had
a series of revelations
and the revelations informed
the rest of his life and they
informed the rest
of his music, too.
He'd been interested in
silence for a long time
and he had been appreciating
noise for a long time.
So he had this dualism
about science versus noise
so he was looking for silence
as an alternative to noise.
When he ventured into an
antecourt chamber in Boston,
he was looking for the
quietest place on Earth
because Ramakrishna had
said, find the silence
and you will find God.
>> And I heard in
that room, two songs.
One was high and one was low.
And I thought, there was
something wrong with the room.
I went outside and I found the
engineer in charge and he said,
the high one was your
nervous system in operation.
And the low one was
your blood circulating.
>> He realizes that
silence is an abstraction.
It's a human concept.
And what's actually happening
is that Cage and his own body
and his own being is completely
interconnected with all beings
and all bodies of
beings everywhere,
and that everyone
shares the same ground.
>> Then it became clear, that
the function of art is not
to communicate one's personal
ideas or feelings, but rather,
to imitate nature in
her manner of operation.
>> Cage's most important
piece of music is--
as many people know--
actually not music at all.
It's four and a half
minutes of silence.
When Cage first performed
that piece with David Tudor--
his pianist-- he performed
it in Woodstock, New York,
at a little bar called
Maverick Concert House.
And the audience went berserk.
This was 1952--
August 29th, 1952.
>> They were incensed.
They were in an uproar
over the performance.
And afterwards, John opened
the floor to questions and one
of the artists got up and
said, good people of Woodstock,
I think we should run
these people out of town.
That was the reaction.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Silence is where we
hear something deeper than
our chatter.
And silence is where
we speak something
deeper than our words.
All of us know that the most
essential things in life
are exactly what
we can't express.
Our relation to faith.
Our relation to love.
Our relation to death.
Our relation to divinity.
So I think, silence
is the resting place
of everything essential.
>> For the first, I don't know
how many hundred thousand years
of human life, when we were on
the Savannah or running about
the forest, silence was
essential to our survival.
So silence is our natural
milieu, and the farther
we get away from silence, the
more we lose our humanity.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> American individualism
now, has become more and more
associated with our
right and our, almost,
social obligation to impose
our will on the world.
To get out our thoughts.
To not hesitate.
To not be shy.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> There is such an
intense, overwhelming drive
to contribute our little
ricocheting response to this
soul-crushing din of the moment.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Throughout Japanese history,
there has been an appreciation
of softer, quieter
registers of being.
One of the most signal
instances of this
is really, in relationship
to the tea ceremony.
One of the most important
masters, Sen Rikyu,
lived at a time of
incredible martial activity
among different samurai groups.
And part of his interest in
developing the tea ceremony
in the ways that he
did, was to cultivate
an appreciation for silence
and silence's relationship
to a more specific
environment, in general.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Silence allows everybody to
have equal platform and equal
voice because if nobody's
talking, nobody's dominating.
>> Silence is a
sound, and I think,
it's a sound with
many qualities.
And I think, if we
start to cultivate
an appreciation of silence
as the precious thing it
is and enjoy it for
a few minutes a day,
then it gives us a proper
relationship with sound,
with noise, with our own sound.
It allows us to be much
more balanced in the way
that we relate to the
world, much more conscious.
>> When we throw around the
term of silence, we may,
in the first instance, imagine
that we're seeking some kind
of absolute quiet, but very,
very few people look for that.
What we're looking--
I came to believe--
is really, more
for a balance in
our environment.
It's the particular
balance of sound and quiet
that maximizes our perceptual
awareness of where we are.
[MAKING ANIMAL SOUNDS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Sounds a little bit like
one of those toys you see,
you shake it.
It's like a little
[MAKING NOISES]
that sort of a [MAKING NOISES].
Probably should leave
them be, I suppose.
The first superintendent of
this park, Harry Karstens,
he was very aware of the
solitude and quietude
of this place.
And he had an interesting
quote in 1924,
when he said, "there
is much to learn
by those who
understand the language
of the great silent places."
Oftentimes, I make measurements
that can be as low as 13,
14 decibels in the wintertime.
And in the summertime, might be
in the 20 to 25 decibel range.
As the background
level decreases,
your listening area increases.
When in a really
still environment,
you've got this
situation where you
are very large acoustically,
you can detect these very minute
sounds from far away.
And it gives you this incredible
sense of space, this openness.
So we exist in the
world and to be
able to explore that world
with an unbroken attention,
I think that's one of the things
that both silence and intact
soundscape protects that
sort of exploration.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I guess, I got hooked on
birds when I was about eight.
I heard the sound
of a bird bathing
in a woods pool behind
my house, in Virginia.
And I did sort of a jungle
crawl under all this catbriar
and I came out onto this
little blue-winged warbler
bathing in a forest pool.
And it was the most beautiful
thing I'd ever seen.
I really like being
in quiet places
because I use my
ears for everything.
Primitive man, if you
didn't pay attention
to every little
thing around you,
you were going to be
in trouble really fast
or you weren't going to
find anything to eat.
And I think, for
me, it's a question
of keeping in touch with
those primal instincts
and just always being ready
for whatever comes your way.
I call what I do, the
art of disappearing.
It's a situational awareness.
It's a richness of being.
It's a tapping in to
this great show that's
going all around you.
There's that herring.
>> These very quiet environments
offer tremendous opportunities
for listening, but they're also,
the most fragile resources we
have.
Certainly, the
physical beings we are,
were built to function
in these places
and to hear those
distant sounds.
If we really lose
touch with our senses,
with our capacity
for deep listening,
I think we'll lose a
large piece of who we are.
Certainly, of the
animals we once were.
It's just like our muscles.
And if it happens over
time, across generations,
it may not be easily reversed.
To lose our connection with
the world through our senses,
I think, would be
a terrible loss.
And everyone knows this.
The prospect of being
blinded or deafened, I think,
would be terrifying
to most people.
But in fact, it may be happening
in a much more subtle way,
already.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> But what is central to this
whole situation we live in, is
silence.
And that the sounds
that we notice
are merely bubbles on the
surface of silence that bursts.
[BELLS RINGING]
Silence doesn't really exist.
Silence is sounds.
If I stop talking--
for instance-- now,
we hear the sounds
of 6th Avenue.
>> Sound is affecting our
brainwaves, our heart rate,
our breathing, our
hormone secretions--
all of our physical rhythms are
being affected by sound outside
us all the time.
A sudden noise-- for example--
so anybody watching
that, probably,
had a little shot of cortisol,
fight/flight hormone,
and that happens to
us a lot in cities.
On the other hand,
if you imagine surf,
that would calm you down.
In fact, even send you to sleep.
Many people would
go to sleep to surf.
So physiologically,
sound effects
us-- that's the first way.
Second is psychologically.
It changes our
mood, our feelings.
Music does that.
So do other things
like birdsong.
The third way sound
effect us is cognitively
so you can't understand
two people talking
at the same time.
We've got a huge storage
space in our brain,
but the auditory
input channel is
quite limited in its bandwidth.
Roughly 1.6 human conversation.
Because we have no way of it.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
And the final way sound
effects us is behaviorally.
We'll move away from
unpleasant sound.
We'll move, if we can,
towards pleasant sound.
Here in London, they have
about 140 tube stations
with classical music
playing in them now
because the research has shown
that classical music reduces
vandalism.
If you put pounding music on and
you're driving, then suddenly,
you'll drive faster.
That kind of behavioral change
happens to us all the time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Sound is a
physical phenomenon.
And when the sound hits the
ear, the ear physiologically
picks up the sound,
brings it to the brain,
and the sound is identified.
When does it become noise?
That's a different
part of brain.
That's a part of the brain
says, this particular sound
is intruding on what
I'm trying to do.
This is unwanted,
unpleasant sound.
>> It is official,
Arrowhead Stadium is, again,
the loudest outdoor
stadium in the world.
Fans reached 142.2 decibels,
beating the Seattle Seahawks
fans who previously
had that record.
To put this amount of noise
in perspective for you,
it is more than a jet
engine and far more
than the human pain
tolerance of the ear, which
is why the Chiefs passed
out about 36,000 earplugs,
but that's only enough for
half of all these people
that were inside tonight.
[SIRENS]
>> I came to feel that one way
of articulating the presence
of noise is to think about
sound that gets inside of you
and for the time it's
there, dominates all
of your perceptual apparata.
It might be bad
or it may be good.
You might be in the
mood for it or not.
But it's consuming you.
It's taking over your
heartbeat or at least,
taking over your attention.
>> Everybody knows that
education is very, very,
very important, but with the
train passing by every two
minutes, you can't hear some
things that could be very,
very important to know
when you grow older.
>> For schools, the internal
maximum that the city
recommends is 35 decibels.
It's routinely over 85,
with the windows closed.
When the windows are open,
it's routinely in the 90s.
And this school doesn't
have any air conditioning
so in August, and
September, and May,
and June, those
windows have to be open
or is unbearable
in the classrooms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When people make
decisions in noise--
and this has been
shown again and again--
their decisions are reactive.
>> Noise is a huge issue
because it constantly envelops
everything we do.
It surrounds us.
There is technical elements,
devices, pumps, alarms,
physical environment
in combination
with humans that make mistakes.
We see very clearly, anxiety.
Delays in decision making.
Errors in receiving information.
Errors in transmitting
information.
Errors in calculations
of medication dosages.
And a whole series of
other downstream problems
because of confusion caused
by the overall external noise.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Mumbai is the loudest
city in the world,
according to an official
statement of the Central
Pollution Control Board.
We have a whole range
of festivals in India.
We call them traditional,
but traditionally, we
didn't have loudspeakers.
I could say it in terms
of decibel levels,
but I think, I should
just say that if you were
to stand right next
to a jet engine
for a long period
of time, that's
what your house would
be like for at least,
three months during
the festival season.
And people can't bear it.
People in hospital--
there have been
instances of people who have
died due to heart attacks.
[FIREWORKS]
>> The Supreme Court of India
first took notice of noise when
a 10-year-old girl was raped
during a festival and her
screams couldn't be heard
because of the noise.
>> If you look at what's
happening today, I think,
we're in a frenzied
echo chamber.
>> Visually, it's busier.
Acoustically, it's
busier and louder.
>> You just want to go buy a
sweater and you're bombarded
with live music.
>> There are decibel ratings in
New York in restaurants of 90
now.
You're screaming at somebody
from a foot away to be heard.
Technically, in
those restaurants,
all the waiters should be going
around with hearing protectors
on.
>> Obviously, when
you move to New York,
you're moving to a loud city.
It's the biggest, most
vibrant city in the country.
It's famously loud.
Famously never sleeps.
But what has seemed to
happen over the years, what
has changed is noise has
become more ubiquitous.
And we seem to be almost
desensitized to it.
Do you want to ask the
neighbor, is that sound?
>> Oh yeah, is that thumping?
>> Are you get that?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Why should we always be
stimulated or more and more
stimulated so we
reach a fever pitch?
Then what happens?
Where do you go next?
>> There is a tinier and tinier
space for reflective thought.
>> The plane starts at
6:03 in the morning.
They usually stop at
midnight, but sometimes, they
go to 2:00 or 3:00
in the morning.
I did not sign up for
this kind of noise.
Nobody did.
They are making these
precision lanes in the sky.
Right now, that lane
is over my house.
Five years from now, it's
going to be over your house
because those lanes are
going to be multiplied
10-fold, 20-fold, 50-fold.
>> Recent research are building
on a foundation of really,
now almost 50 years of research,
that suggested that there are
more serious health
effects related to noise.
Hypertension, high blood
pressure, and even,
more recently, there is
a very convincing effect
of particularly, transport
noise, road traffic noise,
on a risk of
cardiovascular disease,
heart attacks,
myocardial infarction,
or even death from noise.
>> Noise kills and that's right.
This is what we have shown,
that noise causes heart disease.
People don't die from
one day to another
because they visit a noisy area.
If the noise stress
becomes chronic,
if it's persistent over
many years, all of a sudden,
you may have a heart attack
due to the chronic stress.
>> You don't get used to it.
You cope with it.
>> Something in your
brain is having to go,
I'm not listening to that.
I'm still not listening to that.
I'm definitely not
listening to that.
And it takes effort.
Somewhere, there's mental effort
going on to screen it out.
That's 102 decibels going out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I guess, the question that
is on everyone's mind is,
why I'm doing this.
I could say that it's merely,
a response to something,
like a culture
that's more concerned
about material
things and leisure
and less with reflection
and introspection.
I could say that
it has something
to do with some inner
turmoil of my own.
That it's me trying
to figure out my life.
Honestly, nothing quite
seems to do it for me.
I'm not really sure why.
I feel that I need to do it.
I have this feeling that
it has a lot of potential
to be something, be something
really meaningful for me
and hopefully, for other people.
>> Silence returns
us to what is real.
This is how I see it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Silence is a journey into the
wilderness and into the dark.
You can't be sure what you're
going to encounter there
and I think, many people
are rightly wary of silence
because we use noise as a
distraction and an evasion.
Silence is a journey right
into the heart of your being.
>> If you allow
silence to circulate,
particularly among people, what
you're going to discover is
that your mind becomes
aware of what the truth is.
And sometimes, truth is
not that sugarcoated.
Sometimes, you have to face the
truth that things are not going
the way that you might want.
And that you're losing
or you're failing.
Or they are.
You might feel out of
control because when silence
circulates, it makes you
aware that you're not
in control of anything, really.
So it puts people against a
wall and says, this is you,
and you're human, and
you're existing right now,
and this is your reality.
Do you like it?
And often, people say, no.
>> I guess, that I would
argue in defense of pursuing
the experience, regardless.
That we have such a deficit
of that kind of encounter
in our lives right now.
We have so little that is
opening out onto something
larger.
>> We tend to have substituted
human experience with
technological experience.
">> We think all this noise
and artifice is human,
but it's not.
It takes us away
from what is human.
There's nothing wrong with it.
But we tend to live
via our ingenuity.
Instead of being our own truth.
>> So much in the
ways that we exist,
particularly our forms
of digital connectivity,
take us out of
ourselves all the time--
all the time.
And that's a different
kind of desert.
And ultimately, to me, it's a
much more frightening desert
because that's a desert in which
our individual self is just
obliterated in a circuit of
constant very, very surface
level communication with others.
>> The information revolution
came without a manual and I
think, we are all noticing
that machines can give us,
pretty much, everything,
except the sense of how to make
discerning use of machines.
And that at some
level, we have to go
offline to collect
ourself, to begin
to know how to navigate
the ever more complicated
and accelerating online world.
In the 21st century, I
think, the need for silence
is more urgent than
it's ever been.
>> There tends to be a big
technological discussion about
computers and whether
they're good or they're bad.
And I think that's sort
of a silly discussion.
But there should be a discussion
about how much time you
spend in the real world and
how much time you withdraw.
And I think, that's going to
be a very significant predictor
of the earlier onset of dementia
and other declines in aging
than has ever happened before.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We have less
silence and by that,
I mean that the fabric of noise
is more constant and pervasive.
This shift to a
constant envelopment
within a band of noise
that's too much, I think,
is what's really
driving us crazy.
>> We just build these
cities willy-nilly.
Tire noise, diesel sound--
that kind of stuff is all
around us, all the time.
>> Architecture,
to a large degree,
is about the visual
impact of things.
So it's about the visual
impact of the facade.
It's about the visual impact
of the big public spaces.
It's really not about
the user's experience.
perceptual comfort.
It's really not about
the user preference.
>> In the UK, architects train
for five years and they spend
one day on sound--
in five years.
It's no wonder they're
entirely ocular.
You ask an architect
what's he working on,
he'll show you a picture.
>> People speak at somewhere
between 55 and 65 decibels,
usually.
And often, the heating and
cooling system in a building
is louder than that.
>> This is absolutely, not an
argument for everywhere being
quiet, or everywhere
being the same,
or that there's some sort
of panacea magic soundscape,
or that we want to manipulate
citizens into a 1984 zombie
state, or anything like that.
If we all start taking
on designing with sound,
we will have a huge profusion
of amazing sound to enjoy,
just like we have a huge
profusion of furniture
to enjoy.
And just in the
same way, I think,
we have a million
different soundscapes
that you'll be able to
buy or download or stream.
>> So Quiet Mark is the new
program from the UK'S Noise
Abatement Society, that awards
the quietest, high performance,
low noise technology across
over 35 categories of product
design.
And also, solutions
to unwanted noise.
Everything from home
appliances, airplanes,
cars to the way we build
houses with the materials.
I think, ultimately, consumers
want more peace and quiet.
And we've reached
a point where we
have got so many extraordinary
layers of technology
around us helping us, like
a technology golden age,
but the noise of those machines
have become almost too much
for us to really cope with.
Or we don't really know
what we're coping with.
>> A lot of items are made
these days without an awareness
of their volume.
Put them all together,
it's a cacophony.
It's not a symphony.
>> We made this car the smallest
mobile anechoic chamber.
We put a lot of effort in
modifying the materials which
are used in the car, to get
a very quiet and relaxing
atmosphere in the car.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's not only the design
outside the appliances.
It's not only the
user interface.
It's the whole package and
sound is very, very important
these days for
the whole package.
It's not only the
decibels we measure,
but it's also the quality
of the sound we measure.
>> We are hoping that we
can reduce our noise impacts
through our aircraft and for
the people in our neighborhoods,
by 75% by 2020.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Silence is available to
everyone and it is never too
late to seek silence.
It isn't true that it's
a rich man's plaything.
If you really want to
learn the work of silence,
then you will use your ingenuity
to find a place and a time
for that silence.
>> All of us have changed in the
time since 4'33" was first made
in the early '50s.
We have less
confidence now in time
as it goes into the future.
We wonder, for instance,
how long the future will be?
We don't take for granted
that it will be forever.
We wonder whether we've--
you might say-- we
wonder whether we
have ruined the silence.
[APPLAUSE]
>> 4'33" has performed all
over the world in all kinds
of circumstances.
Some of them very casual.
Some of them like
Carnegie Hall--
very formal.
But people now,
respect this piece.
People sit very quietly for it.
It's as though without knowing
anything about Cage's history
and why he came to
this realization,
it's as though
people get a piece
of that realization themselves.
Four minutes and 33 seconds of
meditation in which everyone
is silent together.
It's the most extraordinary
thing to be in a place
where it's being performed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What you feel is the entire
audience, just listening
to absolutely
everything that happens.
You just sense this
breathing organism
of people in this place
during this moment.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Well, that's one of the
most extraordinary performances
I've ever experienced
here in the Barbican Hall.
4'33" by John Cage.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If we could all learn
the work of silence,
we'd take an awful lot of
pressure off of our planet.
There wouldn't be this
constant seeking, seeking,
seeking for something
else to fill up
that empty space, when what
will fill up the empty space
is actually going
into the empty space.
We do need to adjust
our environment.
We also need to learn
to be able to be silent
and to draw on the
wellspring of silence
when the environment isn't
conducive to silence.
>> In a world of movement,
stillness has become, in a way,
luxury and in a
world of distraction,
it's a tension that
we're hungering for.
And in a world of
noise, silence calls us,
like a beautiful piece
of music on the far side
of the mountains.
>> It's not some
kind of exoticism,
esoteric practices
in a coded language.
It's as simple as shifting your
attention from the things that
cause noise in your life to
the vast interior spaciousness,
which is our natural silence.
It's this process of ungrasping.
It's the process of
opening your hand.
unclenching a fist.